Skip to content


MORTGAGES
JUMBO LOANS: WHEN A REGULAR MORTGAGE ISN’T ENOUGH
Advertiser disclosure
Jumbo Loans: When a Regular Mortgage Isn’t Enough
You may need a jumbo loan for homes that cost more than $726,200. Jumbo loans have stricter qualification rules.


 //
What is a jumbo loan?
A jumbo loan is a mortgage used to finance properties that are too expensive for a conventional conforming loan. The maximum amount for a conforming loan in 2023 is $726,200 in most counties, as determined by the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). Homes that exceed the local conforming loan limit require a jumbo loan.




Also called non-conforming conventional mortgages, jumbo loans are considered riskier for lenders because these loans can’t be guaranteed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, meaning the lender is not protected from losses if a borrower defaults. Jumbo loans are typically available with either a fixed interest rate or an adjustable rate, and they come with a variety of terms.
//
Qualifying for a jumbo loan
Underwriting criteria for jumbo loans are stricter because the loans are larger and riskier for lenders.


Credit score
Lenders may require your FICO score to be higher than 700, and sometimes as high as 720, to qualify for a jumbo loan.


Debt-to-income ratio
Lenders will also consider your debt-to-income ratio (DTI) to ensure you don’t become over-leveraged, though they may be more flexible if you have plentiful cash reserves. Some lenders have a hard cap of 45% DTI, however.


Cash reserves
You’re more likely to be approved for a jumbo loan if you have ample cash in the bank. It’s not uncommon for lenders to ask jumbo loan borrowers to show they have enough cash reserves to cover one year of mortgage payments.


Documentation
To prove your financial health, you’ll need extensive documentation, perhaps more than for a conforming loan. You should be prepared to hand over your full tax returns, W-2s and 1099s when applying, in addition to bank statements and information on any investment accounts.


Appraisals
Some lenders may require a second home appraisal for the property you’re planning to purchase.


//
Jumbo loans vs. conforming loans
The key difference between a jumbo mortgage and a conforming loan is the size of the loan. For a thorough look at the two, and the pros and cons of each, read about the differences between conforming and nonconforming loans.


Among the other factors that differentiate jumbo loans from conforming loans:


Heftier down payment
While low down payments are fairly common on conforming loans, jumbo loans are more likely to require a down payment of at least 20%, though some lenders may go as low as 10%.
//
Potentially higher interest rates
Jumbo mortgage rates may be slightly higher than those on conforming loans, depending on the lender and your financial situation. However, many lenders can offer jumbo loan rates that are competitive with rates on conforming loans — and some may even offer slightly lower rates depending on market conditions, so make sure to shop around.


Higher closing costs and fees
Because jumbo loans are bigger and there are some extra qualifying steps, expect higher costs at the closing table.


//


Loan limits
The loan limit for conforming loans varies by county because some real estate markets are much pricier than others. For 2023, the conforming loan limit for one-unit homes in most counties nationwide is $726,200. However, in “high-cost areas,” especially in the Northeast and on the West Coast, conforming loan limits are expanded to $1,089,300 — and even higher in a few other places.


Ways to get the best jumbo mortgage rates
When you’re shopping for a jumbo loan, it’s smart to make sure your financials are in as good a shape as possible. This means bolstering your savings and pulling your credit reports from the three main credit reporting agencies — Experian, Equifax and TransUnion — then addressing any errors you find. You might also pay down any larger balances. 


Because jumbo loans tend to have stricter requirements than conventional or government-backed loans, anything you can do to improve your financial profile will also likely improve your rate offers.


Once you’re feeling confident about your application, compare mortgage rates between at least three jumbo lenders. Even small differences in the rate you pay could save you — or cost you — thousands of dollars over the term of a home loan.


If the rates you’re quoted for jumbo loans are higher than those for conventional loans, consider increasing your down payment — if you’re able — to avoid taking out a jumbo loan altogether. If your savings don’t support this, an 80-10-10 could help you get there.